>>REGINA MEREDITH: Most of you
watching this are fairly well
aware of the events
of Roswell, New
Mexico in the summer of 1947.
What you may not be
aware of, however,
is that there was an
equally stunning event that
happened in Rendlesham
Forest in England in 1980.
In addition, this
case was very well
documented by those
in the military.
In a two part interview
with Nick Pope,
formerly with the British
Ministry of Defense,
we will hear what happened
on three consecutive nights
in the forest and
how governments
go about covering up or
clouding the facts to keep
it secret from the public.
>>SGT. JAMES PENNISTON: The
craft itself was void of things
that aircraft need to fly.
I mean, it did not have a crew
compartment that I could see.
It did not have exhaust.
It did not have intake.
I couldn't-- I did not
know what the front was.
So it was pretty void
of all those things.
And aerodynamically,
well, it was a brick.
I mean, there's no way
that thing could fly.
And my mindset at the time was
that was not going anywhere.
It was just going to stay there.
So I had all the
time in the world.
>>SGT. JOHN BURROUGHS: Can I
take a second to add to that?
The reason why we were sent
out there by our ship commander
and after a discussion
on the phone
was the fact that eastern radar
was contacted and notified us
that there was
some kind of object
over the base that
disappeared in the forest.
Because it was off base, our
jurisdiction was limited.
But because the possibility
existed that something actually
crashed in the
forest, the decision
was made by the shift
commander to allow
us to go out into the
forest and investigate.
At the same time,
the local authorities
were contacted also.
>>REGINA: We're
going to launch right
into the events in a
minute because there's
so much that we
have to go by way.
This was so much better
documented than Roswell.
It's almost as though Roswell
was just swept under the rug
and left where
this one had act--
there was active knowledge
that was documented
from the very
beginning of the event.
But so here we go
back to, what was it?
Christmas night.
Everybody has a full belly.
They've gone to bed
after celebrating
Christmas festivities.
And in the wee hours, begin
telling us what happened.
>>NICK POPE: Sure.
It's the early hours
of December 26, 1980.
And law enforcement and
security police personnel
guarding these twin bases
of Bentwaters and Woodbridge
in the United Kingdom
see strange lights
in the forest-- like strange,
multi-colored lights.
And they really don't
know what to make of this.
It's like nothing
they've ever seen before.
Their first thought is
that maybe an aircraft
has crashed and is burning.
There are chemicals.
There is a fire.
They don't know.
So they seek
permission to go out,
to investigate, and
to launch, I guess,
a search and rescue
mission if needs be.
But then as they
go out, one of them
says something that
really shocks the others.
And he says it didn't crash.
It landed.
And that, as you can imagine,
kind of sets everyone on edge.
And everyone's very nervy.
And there's a number of
different people driving out
through one of the main gates
in a Jeep into the forest.
And just to put this
into its context,
Bentwaters and Woodbridge are
ostensibly Royal Air Force
bases.
But that's just a fiction.
They're called RAF Bentwaters
and RAF Woodbridge.
They're American bases.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And how far are the two
apart just to give us some--
>>POPE: Really no more
than a few hundred yards.
>>REGINA: OK
>>POPE: Rendlesham Forest
effectively lies between them.
And you know, they're
so close together
that from a command and
control point of view,
they're treated as
a single entity.
So they're sometimes
described as the twin bases.
In other words, there's
one commanding officer
and there's one
deputy base commander.
We'll come onto him later.
He's a big part of the story.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And also, it's interesting.
Because right away,
just from what you said,
we can hear that this is going
to be a very messy affair.
Because you have Americans
occupying a British base.
And you have both commands that
are drawn into this whole thing
maybe at counter
purposes at times, even.
>>POPE: You're
absolutely spot on.
And this whole kind of
conflict between the Americans
and the Brits in
terms of jurisdiction,
in terms of primacy,
leads to lot of confusion.
And I'm sure we'll get into
a discussion about where
the line is between conspiracy
and bureaucracy, for example.
>>REGINA: Yes, yes.
That sometimes is a lot more
subtle line then a lot of us
would think.
Because a lot of
people watching this
have been heavily ensconced
in conspiracy information.
And so there's
just an assumption
that there is an agenda going
on when, oftentimes, it's
such a mess of bureaucracy.
It's not always what it seems.
>>POPE: It isn't, although
sometimes of course it
can be both.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Yeah, I'm not just
dismissing that part.
It's just as we see here, it's
just as we get further in,
it's just fascinating
how this stuff then
ends up being shoved aside
so you can't find it anymore.
But meanwhile, let's go
back to the event itself.
We have First Class
Airman John Burroughs.
He's the one that
spotted the lights.
And he told his
Sergeant-- and this
is the beginning of the
documentation-- Budd Steffens.
Let's go into what
happened there.
>>POPE: Well, that's right.
Budd Steffens is out there.
John Burroughs is out there.
And then the security--
the senior security police
officer on duty Jim Penniston,
gets in on the act, too.
And he comes almost to sort
this out and say, come on,
what's going on
out here, people?
Let's put this to bed.
And he has his rider--
basically his driver-- Ed
Cabansag with him.
So right from the
outset, you've got
a number of different
people involved.
This number starts
to thin out a little.
Because something weird happens.
As they drive out into the
forest-- well, first of all,
this isn't weird.
But the path just gets
narrower and narrower.
And there's a
certain point where
they can't drive the
Jeep any further.
So they get out and
they continue on foot.
But then, their radios
start to cut out.
Now, these were very reliable
line of sight radios.
And suddenly, there's just
interference and crackling.
And about the only
place that this happens
is if there's a dip.
And that wasn't the case here.
So they think, what's going on?
And so they leave some
of the other people back.
And ultimately, it's just John
Burroughs and Jim Penniston
who really are the two at the
absolute vanguard of this.
They go forward to find
out what this thing is,
this thing which
originally they thought was
may be a crashed aircraft.
>>REGINA: How did
they approach it?
I mean, were they armed?
Not that it would matter
in a scenario like this.
But we think of
the normal way as,
like, they must have
had some nerviness to go
into the forest, get out of
their Jeep, go into the forest,
and start walking
toward this thing
that's landed that has
these flashing lights.
Did they have any
kind of defense
at all that one would
normally look to
in a situation like
that, even if it's
somewhat comical in hindsight?
>>POPE: Well, you
know, right away, we
run into one of
the controversies
about this with that question.
In theory, these being
American bases on British soil,
there were very
few circumstances
where live weapons would be
allowed outside the perimeter.
In some counter-terrorist
situations, maybe.
Anyway, the guys say that
all left their weapons back
at base.
Well, you know, I
don't know about that.
>>REGINA: Well,
that's why I'm asking.
You would think that
your impulse would
be to pick up anything that
you're familiar with it
that you could feel might
defend oneself with.
>>POPE: Yes.
Their party line has been,
yeah, we didn't take our guns.
But--
>>REGINA: There have been
some rumor inside that said--
>>POPE: Exactly.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>POPE: Now, they went out.
And yes, to answer
your question,
they were clearly
apprehensive about this.
I guess you could
say that-- well, I
suppose we've all watched things
like "The Blair Witch Project."
Any forest at night is a
pretty spooky, scary place.
But they're highly trained,
fairly tough people, obviously.
And they don't scare easily.
They were apprehensive.
Because this was like nothing
they'd ever seen before.
I mean, this clearly
wasn't a fire
as they got closer
and closer to this.
And the lights, there were
multi-colored lights, but all
the wrong colors
for aircraft lights.
Jim Penniston in particular
was exceptionally familiar
with all different
aircraft types.
So they were apprehensive,
but they had a mission.
And they went through
with their job.
So they approached this
small clearing in the trees.
And suddenly, there it was.
Not a crashed
aircraft-- a landed UFO.
A small, triangular shaped
craft maybe nine feet across,
nine feet tall.
Clearly, again, with Jim's
aircraft recognition hat
on, as he said years later,
well, like no aircraft--
>>REGINA: No prototype.
Yeah.
>>POPE: No, nothing.
And strange markings on
the side of this thing.
>>REGINA: Yes
>>POPE: A bit like
Egyptian hieroglyphs.
>>REGINA: Yes
>>POPE: Now, he went up.
First thing he did, he
had a camera with him.
He shot off a
whole roll of film.
And then when he
finished with that,
he flipped out his
police notebook
and started sketching it.
>>REGINA: Thank
goodness he did that.
>>POPE: Yes.
Because he was later told
that, oh, sorry, your film
didn't come out.
>>REGINA: Yeah, right.
>>POPE: Yeah.
Well, there is a debate
about that, you know.
>>REGINA: I mean it could've
been the same interference that
didn't allow the walkie-talkies
to work right, right?
>>POPE: And it could've been.
It could also have been there
was a very bright light source
here.
And particularly, and this is
an important point of the story
that perhaps we'll
get into, there
was high levels of
radioactivity in this clearing
almost certainly as a
direct result of the craft.
And any of those things may--
>>REGINA: Yeah, could
affect the film.
>>POPE: Yeah, so we instantly--
we may not automatically
be in the conspiracy
territory here.
We may indeed be in, well,
these sorts of things happen.
Anyway, Jim is
documenting all this.
He approaches this craft.
And he starts-- he sees
these strange symbols
like the hieroglyph.
He touches them.
And then he touches the largest
one, a very prominent symbol
of a triangle shape with
a circle imposed on it.
And as he touches this thing,
there's a flash of light.
And he hits the deck.
Jim-- pardon me--
John, he looks back.
And John is on the ground.
This is to his perspective.
John remembers it kind
of a different way.
And, you know, all of
this is interesting.
Several people entered
the forest that evening.
They all came out with slightly
different recollections
of what took place.
Again, that's
interesting in of itself.
Jim thought John was maybe
a casualty at that point.
He's down.
He saw he was down.
John remembers, as he puts
it, going into the light.
Very provocative, given
some of the testimony
that we hear from people
in the UFO community
about these sorts
of experiences.
Suffice to say that this thing
is just hovering or maybe
landed on three legs on
a tripod like device.
When John touches that
final symbols, the flash,
the thing starts to slowly
rise up above the ground.
And it goes very, very
slowly up vertically.
It's a very small clearing.
It maneuvers its way
through this tiny gap
at the top of the trees--
maybe 30, 40, 50 feet up.
And then suddenly, it
just accelerates away
to the horizon.
And Jim writes in his police
notebook, speed impossible.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And that was-- and
he had knowledge.
So this meant
something at the time.
There was another element
to it I read in your book.
And that had to do
with the feeling
they had as they
approached the craft.
The energy completely shifted.
Can you talk about that a bit?
>>POPE: Yes.
They've used expressions like
the air was heavy with almost
like a static electricity.
That there seemed to be an
almost an otherworldliness
about this.
The phrase almost like
walking through treacle
or being underwater is phrases
that both of them have used.
This was not a normal situation.
And again, one can
speculate about this.
But I think knowing what we know
now, clearly the focus is on
was there some sort of
energy source or propulsion
system at work, an
unconventional one, which
caused not only these strange
sensations, but things
like the interference
with the radios
that we spoke about
a little earlier.
>>REGINA: And when he
was running his hand
over the craft, as I recall,
it was smooth like glass
until they hit those symbols.
>>POPE: Yes.
Now, these symbols were raised.
I mean, there was a definite
pattern and texture to them.
So it wasn't just
the fact that they
were the only marks
on this thing.
They had a different
texture, too.
And I mean, again, some people
have speculated-- I even
speculated when I
looked for some sort
of conventional explanation,
I said, well, look.
Could this have been some
sort of secret prototype
Soviet craft?
And could these strange letters
have been Cyrillic alphabet?
And Jim just laughed.
And he said, Nick, when I
say I was trained on aircraft
recognition, bear in mind it's
the height of the Cold War.
He told me he was trained in
Soviet aircraft recognition as
well as anything that we might
have in terms of the United
States, the United Kingdom.
And he said this
was no Soviet craft.
In fact, this was no
craft of any type.
I mean this--
>>REGINA: Of any human origin.
>>POPE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yes.
So again, I mean, to me,
a lot of the evidence
comes from the feeling of it
and also the experience of it.
And that when they experience
this blast of white light
when he ran his hand over the
largest of one of these raised
symbols, something else
happened, too, didn't it?
>>POPE: It did.
And he-- the only way he can
really put this into words
is that it was as if there
was a flash into his mind,
into his consciousness.
And what he has
subsequently termed
a sort of telepathic
download of ones and zeroes.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>POPE: And what happened was
that he put this from his mind
somehow.
Maybe it was suppressed
or repressed,
whichever of those techniques.
Two or three days
later, when he was back
at home, as if under
some sort of compulsion,
he again reached for
his police notebook.
And as if in a
trance, he wrote down
16 pages of ones and zeroes.
>>REGINA: Yes, and we can
see what these look like.
Now, this was not common
language at the time--
the language of
the computer model.
>>POPE: No, indeed.
And he certainly
didn't recognize it
as what many people now
say must be binary code.
>>REGINA: Yes
>>POPE: And this has been
dubbed the Rendlesham
Code, the Rendlesham
Binary Message,
whatever people in the UFO
community-- whatever phase
they use.
But there is huge amount
of interest and controversy
in this at present.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Was there a message
that was deciphered?
>>POPE: There was.
A couple of years
ago, Jim Penniston
was taking part in a TV special.
And he was filming.
And in between takes, he
had out his police notebook.
And he was saying
to the director,
oh yes, you want to see
the sketch of the UFO
that I made and the
symbols on the side.
Let me find it for you.
And as he was flicking
through, suddenly he
got to be 16 pages
of ones and zeroes.
Somebody happened to be kind
of watching over his shoulder
and just said, Jim, what's that?
And Jim was like, oh, well, you
didn't really ask about that.
But if you must know, that's
that strange code message
that I got when I
touched the craft.
>>REGINA: Was he reticent
to share that all along?
This was not easy for him
because he didn't understand
what had happened there, right?
>>POPE: Two reasons.
Firstly, he didn't
really understand
what he was dealing with.
But secondly and
far more immediately
in the aftermath of the
incident itself, Jim
had an exceptionally
high security clearance.
And he was also on what
was called PRP-- Personal
Reliability Program.
These were people who
had a high security
clearance and extra
layers of vetting.
And he basically-- the
way he's told this to me
is, like, if I'd have
said, oh, by the way, when
I touched the side
of this UFO, I
had this kind of
telepathic download,
he would have been
drummed out of the PRP
and maybe indeed the
United States Air
Force as a whole faster
than the blink of an eye.
So he made a conscious
decision back in 1980
not to say anything
about the code.
>>REGINA: So now, here we are,
a couple of years ago, 2012ish,
and someone's looking over his
shoulder and sees this code.
Then what happened?
>>POPE: Well, at that point, the
TV production company thought,
well, we need to look
into this; let's get
hold of a computer expert.
And they got hold of this guy
who knew all about binary code.
They came up with this,
I suppose, translation.
And they simply put
this-- you know,
you can do this on
the internet yourself.
You can put in all
these ones and zeroes.
And there are websites that say
binary to text, text to binary.
And you got out this strange
message-- exploration
of humanity continuous for
planetary advance origin year
8,100 eyes of our
eyes-- and then
a series of what appeared
to be latitude and longitude
geographical coordinates
that just happened
to match a number
of I suppose you'd
call them power sites
of great significance
to people interested in
ancient wisdom, spirituality.
>>REGINA: And what
were those sites?
>>POPE: The Great
Pyramid at Giza,
the Nazca Lines, the temple
of Apollo, and one of them
even turned out to be
coordinates associated
with Hy Brasil, which is
sometimes dubbed the Celtic
Atlantis-- this
mysterious Celtic legend
of this sunken continent.
And again, what's
interesting about that
is many cultures all around
the world quite independently
have this kind of central belief
of some prior civilization that
had great knowledge and power
and wisdom and technology.
>>REGINA: And this is global.
And it's embedded in all of
the ancient religions and texts
as well.
>>POPE: Yes.
And somehow as a result
of some great cataclysm--
often a flood, of course,
as we see in the Bible--
this civilization was destroyed.
The knowledge was somehow lost.
And this turned up again in
the so called Rendlesham Code.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
Now, where-- what
was that location?
>>POPE: This is in the Atlantic
Ocean just off of the West
coast, I guess, of
Ireland, a bit further out.
>>REGINA: Interesting
>>POPE: But Jim
Penniston really had
no interest in the
esoteric, in New Age.
He was a real no-nonsense senior
sergeant on security police
at these highly
sensitive military bases
at the height of the cold war.
>>REGINA: Right.
So this is-- yes, that wouldn't
have been his first concern.
But since that came to light
and since that decoding of sorts
occurred, has this
been handed over
to other groups of individuals
for further examination
and contemplation?
>>POPE: Yes, indeed.
In the TV show, and
I believe it was
the ubiquitous "Ancient
Aliens" that did this special,
we obviously had
this translation.
But a couple of years ago, John
Burroughs, Jim Penniston, and I
actually teamed up
and we wrote this book
"Encounter in
Rendlesham Forest."
And we took the decision
that not withstanding
what "Ancient Aliens" had done
in hiring their own expert,
this was not on all
16 pages of the code.
For a number of
reasons, I think,
Jim was still
reluctant to make--
>>REGINA: How many pages of
code did he allow them to see?
>>POPE: I'm not sure
how many they looked at.
But suffice to say
that in our book,
we took the decision to publish
for the first time all 16 pages
exactly as they
appeared in his notebook
rather than just snippets
of them or translations.
And the reason we did that
is we wanted the UFO research
community, we wanted
the esoteric community,
to have the raw data and to
say, look, a number of people
have had a go at this.
You have a go.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>POPE: See what
you make of this.
We didn't want to
keep this secret.
We didn't want, if this was some
message, to set ourselves up
as custodians of it.
>>REGINA: Exactly
>>POPE: We felt that if there
was an important message here,
it was a message for everyone.
>>REGINA: That was generous,
brilliant in its transparency.
And have you since
been receiving
various-- varied
interpretations of it?
>>POPE: We have.
And there's a lot out there.
I mean, I think if--
I don't want to--
>>REGINA: We won't.
>>POPE: --in a sense
favor any one translation.
But suffice to
say, again, if you
Google phrases such as the
Rendlesham Code, the Rendlesham
Binary Message,
you'll find a number
of websites devoted to it.
And a number of
esoteric researchers
are bringing their own
very considerable knowledge
and experience to bear on this.
And it's exciting times.
>>REGINA: Yes, very exciting.
I mean, to me, that's
one of the most
juicy parts of that whole story.
>>POPE: It is.
And not withstanding
this translation,
continuous advancement,
et cetera, et cetera,
I can't help but wonder.
If there's a real
message there, maybe it's
buried a little bit deeper.
Maybe it's a little
bit more subtle.
Again, that's one
of the reasons we
decided to put the
raw data out there.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>POPE: Now, of course,
this phrase that crops up,
origin year 8400--
>>REGINA: Yes, that's
what struck me.
From what point?
>>POPE: What this has
lead to, of course,
is a number of people
suggesting that what we're
dealing with here is not,
as some people believe,
extraterrestrials, but perhaps
time travelers from the future.
Now, I can't really say.
I mean, my take is until we
have a definitive answer,
I don't think any of us should
be so arrogant as to say,
here's what it was.
We've cracked the code.
We've solved the mystery.
I don't know.
But again, I think the
interesting thing about this
is it throws open the debate.
For years and years,
the only question
was this kind of believer
versus skeptic dog fight over,
is it aliens, or is it
just something conventional
we've misidentified?
>>REGINA: That's a
really big point.
Because in all the
interviews I do
and all the stories I encounter
which are always intriguing,
the one thing that comes up is
the need for nuanced thinking
now, across the board.
It doesn't really
matter what the subject
is, and certainly in ufology.
Because we tend to want to
fall into one camp or another
to make it easy on ourselves.
Somehow, I don't know what
it is in human beings that
feel their mind can't handle
subtleties and conflicts
with a fair amount
of confidence.
But that's what's
really required now
in these examinations.
>>POPE: I think so.
We do like to label things.
And we do like to put things
into very specific pigeon
holes.
So with Rendlesham
Forest, some people
put it in the alien pigeonhole.
Others will put it in the
time travel pigeonhole.
Others will speculate about
other dimensions and things
like that.
A few years ago,
that might have been
regarded as science fiction.
I guess some of
the things going on
at the large hadron collider--
>>REGINA: Oh yes.
That's not science
fiction any longer.
>>POPE: No, indeed.
We can rethink all that.
>>REGINA: Yeah, absolutely.
>>POPE: But I'm not a
great one for these labels.
And I can't help but wonder
that if there is ever
a great parting of the curtain
moment and a great revelation--
here it is, this is what it
is-- I can't help but think
that we'll all go, oh.
So it was something completely
different all along,
something maybe that we
don't have the words for.
We perhaps haven't even
begun to conceptualize yet.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And to have the
humility to just be
comfortable with waiting until
it's obvious-- and exploring.
There's nothing
wrong with exploring
all of these possibilities.
I'm all for that.
But not to necessarily
attach too heavily
to where it becomes
dogma in and of itself.
>>POPE: Yes.
And I think we can't-- in a
sense, we can't help this.
Because inevitably,
we bring with us
baggage in terms of our cultural
background, our knowledge,
our belief system.
And I'm not the first
one to make this analogy.
But if you were to wake up
in the middle of the night
and see a shadowy at
the foot of your bed,
paranormal researchers
might think ghost.
UFO researchers
might think alien.
Religious people
might think angel.
And again, these are all labels.
>>REGINA: Yes, absolutely.
OK, well, thank
you for taking time
to flesh that code out
a little bit for us.
And now we're going to go
back to the diagram of what
happened that evening.
What are blotters?
And right here, I
ask the questions,
when did they go missing?
Because most of us
have never heard
the term blotter to begin with.
And why is this
significant to this story?
>>POPE: Blotters are effectively
just kind of notebooks, pads.
And when something
happens, duty staff
will write it onto the blotters.
So there are security blotters.
There are police blotters, a
number of different blotters.
And the important thing is that
it's a record of what happened.
Now, John and Jim, after
this spectacular encounter,
they're just left
shaking their heads.
They return to base.
They say, what the
heck are we going
to tell anyone about this?
They won't believe us.
And so they think, well, what's
the least they can get away
with?
Well, we saw some
strange lights.
We did see a craft, but
we couldn't identify it.
We'll kick it up the
chain of command.
When they got back,
they found that the base
was in a state of
absolute panic.
And they had been gone for
longer than they believed.
And there was a discrepancy in
terms of their wrist watches
and the time back at base
of around about 45 minutes.
And indeed, they
were on the point
of sending search parties
out to look for them.
I mean, again, operational
military bases,
two of the most strategically
vital bases in the entire NATO
alliance at the height of the
Cold War, people going out
to investigate what
was classified.
No one was talking UFOs.
It was a security situation.
And the people go missing.
You can well understand why this
was a cause of huge concern.
Well, suffice to say, they
go back in the nick of time.
The information
or the basic story
that they encountered
something unknown out there
was written onto the police
and the security blotters.
But within 24 hours, those
blotters went missing.
Somebody had somehow entered
the secure area-- or maybe they
worked there already in the
first place-- and spirited away
one of the most
important, I suppose,
initial documentation
of what happened.
Now, subsequently, a whole
bunch of different witnesses
were told to write up
statements of what happened.
And there were five
witness statements.
But these are a complete mess.
Some of the witnesses
say, I didn't write it.
Some of them are handwritten.
>>REGINA: Oh yes.
Yes.
>>POPE: Some of them are typed.
Not all of them are dated.
>>REGINA: Yes,
we're going to get
into that whole aspect of it.
OK.
So the blotters went missing
that had the original accounts.
In addition to that, they sent
the film to the Air Force lab.
>>POPE: Yes.
This was really the
only first night of--
>>REGINA: Oh, that's
my next question.
So please continue
on right now, yes.
>>POPE: I can do
the second night
quite quickly because
comparatively little is
known about this.
But after John and Jim's
encounter on the first night,
there was a second night
where, really, balls of light
were seen by completely
different bunch of security
police, law
enforcement personnel.
Again, all military witnesses.
But really, balls of light.
But the sighting which
was of most, I suppose,
concern was that two of the
security police personnel were
driving a Jeep
through the forest,
travelling towards the location
where some of these balls
of light had been seen.
And they had the windows
open in the cab up front.
And a ball of light flew
through the open window
on one side, passed
directly in front,
just inches from
the faces of the two
people in the front cab, and out
again through the open window
the other side.
Suffice to say that one
of the people on duty who
was a lieutenant was so
shocked by this and clearly
in a state of shock that they
had to be taken off duty.
And everyone was just stunned--
>>REGINA: Right
>>POPE: --by this.
But for a number of
reasons, these witnesses
from the second night, which
I call the intermediary night,
have been reluctant
to come forward.
The third night involved
the return of the UFO
and-- I mentioned him right at
the beginning-- the involvement
of the deputy base commander
whose name was the Lieutenant
Colonel Charles Halt.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Now, he's a really
key player here.
We're going to get to
Halt in just a moment.
I wanted to ask you about--
one of the people reported
to Colonel Ted Conrad, right?
>>POPE: Yes.
>>REGINA: And Conrad
was at a social affair
and chose not to
respond at all to this.
>>POPE: Yes.
This is what happened
on the third night.
And what happened,
as you say, there
was this social function which
was in fact an awards ceremony.
And it was just
about to get underway
when the door was burst open
and one of the junior officers
came up and found Ted Conrad
and Charles Halt together.
Now, Ted Conrad was
the base commander.
Charles Halt was a
deputy base commander.
And even these
terminologies are a little
misleading to people without
a military background
because senior to them
was Gordon Williams, who
was the wing commander.
So he was in overall
command of the twin bases.
But on this night and
at this social function,
Ted Conrad and Charles Halt were
the senior ranking officers.
So the young airman saluted
and said, sir, it's back.
And there was a, you
know, well, what's back?
What are you talking about?
The UFO, sir.
The UFO that's been
seen previously.
It's come back.
Ted Conrad decided that Halt
should go and investigate.
Now, maybe this
was because Conrad
felt that his place was
at the award ceremony
and that the senior ranking
officer should be handing out
the awards.
Or maybe it was simply because
it was a cold, miserable night
in the English countryside.
And after all, rank
has its privileges.
But for whatever reason,
Conrad said to Halt,
you deal with this.
So Halt threw together a team
of about half a dozen people.
And he went out into the forest.
In his words, he said, I'm going
to debunk this UFO nonsense,
put this crazy business to
bed for once and for all.
Well, that didn't end up.
>>REGINA: He turned out to be
the better choice of the two.
>>POPE: Yes, I think so.
>>REGINA: Yes
>>POPE: Though, of
course, had Conrad
actually seen this and
experienced this, who knows?
Maybe he would have ended
up where Halt is now.
Halt said, you know, if there's
anything out in the forest,
I want to light this whole
area up and flush it out.
So he ordered what
are called light-alls
to be taken into the forest.
And these are just basically
very powerful lights
which you can drag or
drive on a flatbed vehicle.
And he called for these things.
And as they went
out into the forest,
all these lights began
to splutter and die.
A bit like the radios
back on the first night.
Well, Halt was in a
state of disbelief
and a little bit of anger.
And he was like, what?
Aren't these fueled properly?
Get this sorted out now.
And there was dozens
of people out there.
People are running around
like headless chickens
going back to the fueling depot.
These things seem to
be properly fueled.
There didn't seem
to be obvious signs
of any technical malfunction.
But just every time they tried
to get them out, they cut out.
So anyway, Halt decided
while he was waiting
for these light-alls
to be sorted out,
he would go back to where it
all began on the first night
to where Jim and John
had had their encounter.
So he went out to the
clearing with his team.
And at that point, they couldn't
see anything unusual themselves
in terms of the UFO that
they'd been told had returned.
So he started to
document what could
be witnessed in the clearing.
And sure enough, exactly
where Jim and John
said that they'd
encountered this UFO
were three indentations
in the ground.
Now, the ground was really
hard and frozen solid.
And these fresh marks
suggested to Halt
there's an object weighing
several tons had--
>>REGINA: Even though
it was so tiny.
>>POPE: Absolutely.
It had been there.
And later on, people
poured plaster of Paris
into this to get a mold of it
as part of the investigation,
as part of the attempt to
document what they could
discern about this object
from the trace evidence
that they had.
But the real critical thing
that Halt did at that point
is that he had with
him Monroe Nevilles.
Monroe Nevilles was the
disaster preparedness officer.
And he had with him
a Geiger counter.
And they swept the area.
And sure enough,
right in the middle
of the clearing
where this thing had
been seen to land, and
particularly in these three
indentations, they got spikes,
peak readings of radioactivity.
And all around the edge
of this small clearing,
there were trees.
And the inward facing
sides of these trees
were visibly scorched.
And again, there was
high radioactivity
found on the inward
sides of the trees.
Not the outwards.
The outward facing
bits were fine.
But not just visible
blackened scorch marks,
but high levels of
radioactivity, clearly as if
a high heat source and a
source of high radioactivity
had been there.
Was this associated, again
as I speculated earlier,
with some sort of exotic energy
source or propulsion system?
It's speculation,
but I think it's
a fairly sound piece
of speculation.
Something anomalous caused that.
>>REGINA: And the beauty
of Halt being there
and witnessing this is
that he was carrying
within him a cassette
recorder throughout all
of his investigation
that became really key,
which is why I mentioned
him earlier, right?
>>POPE: Yes.
He's like the Dale
Cooper of this incident.
I don't know if you
remember "Twin Peaks,"
but Special Agent Cooper
always carried with him
this hand-held Dictaphone.
And Halt was exactly the same.
He carried this thing pretty
much everywhere he went.
And any observations,
any thoughts,
he would record them so that
he would have a record of it
later.
And incredibly,
that audio record
of Halt going out into
the forest with his team
has survived.
And we have it.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I know.
I just-- I was so
thrilled to learn that.
OK, now let's-- we're going to
shift just a little bit before
we continue the story in terms
of, what is the Suffolk area
about?
There were rumors that
there were nuclear warheads
in this area which
weren't supposed to be.
Let's talk about what was there.
Why might it been
that this area was
chosen on those three nights
to have this contact of sorts?
>>POPE: Well, this
area of England,
this part of Suffolk dating
back almost to the dawn of time
has been associated with all
sorts of strange occurrences.
And it now survives in terms
of legend and folklore.
Everything from
witchcraft to black dogs.
More recently and
better documented,
this is an area
which has been used
for secret military and
scientific research.
It was the part of the country
where, for example, radar
technology was first developed,
something which of course had
a pivotal effect on the outcome
of the Second World War.
So arguably, one
of those turning
points in human history.
Also, it's an area associated
with the embryonic British
nuclear research program,
with over the horizon radar
tests, something called Cobra
Mist, which has sometimes
been described as
a British HAARP.
A lot of controversy about that.
As to the question of
nuclear weapons at Bentwaters
and Woodbridge, I am still bound
by the Official Secrets Act.
And although I left
the British government
some years ago after 21 years
in the Ministry of Defense,
I can still neither confirm
nor deny the presence
of nuclear weapons
at this location
at that particular time.
But there is a lot of material
out there on the internet.
And if it helps you and
if it helps viewers--
>>REGINA: They
can search for it.
Because the evidence
was that it was
violating certain
treaties of the day.
>>POPE: Again, I
can't go into that.
>>REGINA: Potentially.
>>POPE: Well, to give you one
anecdote, the people guarding
a specific area of
the base where there
was particularly high
security nicknamed it Hot Row.
So again, I think you can
draw your own conclusions--
>>REGINA: Yes, draw
our own conclusions.
>>POPE: --for that.
But I can't, with regret.
And I checked this recently
with the Ministry of Defense
press office.
I said, look, come on.
Isn't this all a bit of
Cold War history now?
And they said, no.
You must stick to the line
that you can neither confirm
nor deny the presence
of nuclear weapons
at any given location
at any particular time.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>POPE: That's been
a longstanding policy
of, in fact, both the British
and the American government.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Now let's talk about
the convenient use
of the word or the term
neither confirm nor deny.
Because this has a lot more
punch than people understand.
>>POPE: Yes.
On the one hand,
you could almost
regard it as a sort of
glorified no comment.
But it does go much
further than that.
What it means is that even
if we have testimony as we
do from somebody like Lord
Hill Norton, a former chief
of the defense staff
in the United Kingdom--
so a five star military officer.
Really, the American
equivalent would
be Chairman of the Joint Chiefs.
He, when after his
retirement, went on the record
and said, yes, there
were nuclear weapons
at the twin bases of
Bentwaters Woodbridge.
But even testimony
like that does not
get the government to
say, oh, all right, then.
Neither confirm nor deny,
NCND, is still the line.
And it crops up in
relation to submarines
visiting foreign bases.
It crops up in relation
to nuclear weapons.
to US UK treaties.
It really does lay
at the heart of maybe
the whole diplomatic
relationship
between the US and the UK, a
relationship which, by the way,
was strained almost to breaking
point over the Rendlesham
Forest incident, as we will
perhaps get on to discuss.
>>REGINA: Yes.
We'll talk about that
in our next conversation
about how cover-ups occur.
Meanwhile, Halt
himself said that he
felt there was collusion
between the American and British
governments to
cover up this event.
>>POPE: Yes.
Halt has made it
very clear, and he's
particularly outspoken on this.
He says-- he says sometimes,
well, people say, oh,
isn't there-- who would
cover up something like this?
It would take some sort
of super secret agency.
And he says, folks,
let me tell you.
There is such a
super secret agency.
And covering it up is
exactly what they did.
And of course, Halt didn't
just document John and Jim's
sighting in relation
to the burnt trees
and the radioactivity.
He then, as you can go
on to hear on the tape,
did encounter the UFO himself.
And again, one of the
most dramatic things
on the audio tape is
where somebody calls it
to his attention and says,
sir, through the trees.
It's coming this way.
And you hear, it's
coming this way.
It's definitely coming this way.
And at one point, this
UFO is directly overhead
and fires a narrow beam of
light down at the ground
just feet in front
of him and his men.
And he said in later years
looking back at this,
was this a weapon?
Was this communication?
Was this a warning?
What was this?
And later on, right at the
end of his encounter, which
although the tape is
about 17 or 18 minutes,
it's edited down from
about two or three hours.
He wasn't recording
for the whole time.
And there's controversy about
whether those other parts--
>>REGINA: Missing tape.
Yeah, missing time on the tape.
>>POPE: Yes.
>>REGINA: Vis-a-vis Nixon, yeah.
>>POPE: But the last
thing you hear on the tape
is Colonel Halt out in
the forest looking back.
And he reports the
UFO hovering directly
over the Woodbridge base,
firing beams of light
down at the ground.
And some witnesses on the
ground have said in later years
that the light beams struck
a particularly sensitive part
of this military establishment.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And you were on television last
night, as a matter of fact,
on the Science Channel--
"Unexplained Files."
And you were actually doing
what I'm doing right now.
You, because of your position
and your security oaths,
you were placed in the position
of the journalist asking
the questions, which puts you
in a little safer position
but in a place of knowledge.
And you talked
about, specifically,
the relationship between
UFOs and nuclear facilities
not just there, but in general.
And I recently interviewed
Robert Salas over this.
And so we're going to talk about
that a little more in part two.
But I have a couple
little questions
to ask just before we tie up.
After your time in the-- during
your time in the military
and after, how did
you end up feeling
as a citizen about the
process of disinformation
and how it occurs?
>>POPE: Well, I
should clarify and say
that although I worked for
the Ministry of Defense
for 21 years, I was actually
a civilian employee.
So I was never in
the military myself.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>POPE: But clearly,
I worked alongside--
>>REGINA: Thank
you for clarifying.
>>POPE: No, I worked
alongside the military,
alongside colleagues in
the intelligence community.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>POPE: And I suppose--
guilty confession time--
that with your
question in mind, I
suppose I was part of that
misidentification process.
Our policy over many
years was very clear.
We consistently told the
British parliament, the media,
and the public that the UFO
issue and specific cases
like the Rendlesham
Forest incident
were of very little
interest to the department
and were assessed as being
of no defense significance.
And yet, behind the
scenes, as is now
quite clear from the
declassification and release
of much of the British
government's UFO files,
behind the scenes, it
was very clear there
was an entirely different
story-- highly classified
intelligence studies going
on into the phenomenon,
conclusions which
were certainly,
I think, at odds with the no
defense significance sound bite
that we trotted out.
And indeed, in black
and white, in one
of declassified
documents, it actually
says the well documented
Rendlesham Forest incident
is an example, we would suggest,
of a case in which witnesses
were irradiated by what we call
a UAP-- Unidentified Aerial
Phenomena.
We didn't like--
>>REGINA: And that includes
Burroughs and Penniston,
who have suffered.
>>POPE: They have.
They have health
issues to this day.
They are struggling to
seek appropriate diagnosis
and treatment, and to do that,
need their contemporaneous
military medical records,
which they do not
seem to be able to access.
>>REGINA: No surprise
there, I suppose.
Now, why did you
do this project?
Before we go on to
part two another time,
why did you decide
to write this book?
>>POPE: I felt that there
had been a lot of speculation
about this.
There had been a lot of
kind of people telling
their stories in
bits and pieces.
But this was always
outsiders looking in.
I thought, what if I could
get the two witnesses really
at the heart of this-- John
Burroughs and Jim Penniston,
who after all got
closest to this thing.
Jim touched it and
had this download.
John-- maybe the phrase
again that's being used
is went into the light.
John and Jim from the point of
view of the witnesses, myself
from the point of
view of somebody
who's worked on the UFO issue
for the British government.
So this book, "Encounter
in Rendlesham Forest,"
would be a chance to tell the
story not from the outside in,
but from the inside out.
So we flip the dynamic.
And I think that combination of
the military witnesses telling
their story for the
first time and myself
as a government UFO investigator
was a unique combination.
And as a result, which has
started a few conspiracy
theories itself, this was
the only UFO book in history
ever to have required security
clearance by both the American
and the British government.
>>REGINA: And you procured that.
>>POPE: Yes.
We got that.
Clearly when we speculate
about some aspects of the base
where this took
place and clearly
as we get into some
scientific and technical areas
relating to intelligence
and weaponization--
and again, perhaps we'll
get on to this in part two--
there are clear limits.
And there are some
places that we can't go.
But what I hope we've
done is put enough out
into the public domain that
we can get certain people
in Congress, in the media, who
we know are interested in this
but perhaps won't say
so publicly, to take
a serious look at both
the Rendlesham Forest
issue and indeed
the UFO phenomenon
as a wider kind of phenomenon.
>>REGINA: Well, I have to say
you've done a beautiful job.
And I was so excited
to know of this book
and read it because there's
so many people in my own life,
personally, that--
you know, I love
to share information
with them about some
of the things I've
been exposed to.
But there's always this fringe
factor kind of perception
that's going on.
And reading this
book was really,
I think, the first book
I've read where I thought,
this is so well-documented
and put together and because
of your position and the
position of the others
that we can kind of now lay
the fringe factor part of this
to rest and start getting
on with some real dialogue
about it even for the
most die hard skeptics.
>>POPE: Well, thank you.
And that was absolutely
what we set out to do.
Every claim we make
in the book can
be validated by documents
the provenance of which
is not disputed.
We talk about radiation levels.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>POPE: We quote the document.
We produce it in the appendix.
>>REGINA: And the recordings
exist of the original event.
>>POPE: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Well, I want to thank
you so much on that.
And then of course,
we're going to go on
to part two which is
where some of the more
controversial
information takes place.
Thank you so much
for your time, Nick.
>>POPE: Thank you.
>>REGINA: The means
by which information
is obscured is
fascinating, beginning
with injecting witnesses with
sodium pentothal, or truth
serum, and subjecting them to
hypnosis prior to having them
sign statements prepared
by the military.
It's a fascinating story which
we will continue in part two.
Nick's book is "Encounter
at Rendlesham Forest,"
which you can purchase
at any major bookseller.
Until then, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.